---
layout: post
title: "On social networks and anonymity"
date: 2017-09-29 01:12
categories: Ramblings
---
Social networks have become an integral part of life for a lot of people. They
may seem like a relatively new invention, becoming part of our general culture
and way of life in massive numbers [from 2008 onwards](http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/08/social-networking-usage-2005-2015/).
But truth is, there has always been a social aspect to the internet since its
early days.

There are some of us who remember an internet without Facebook, Twitter or
Instagram. Instead of Slack and Reddit, we had IRC and message boards. 4chan was
still in its infancy (some greybeards still cursing the [Eternal
September](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eternal_September) will excuse me). The
technical requirements to access this social sphere of the internet were a bit
higher then than today. There were no smartphones, no apps, nothing to make it
easier for you to sign up and start taking part of this social internet.

But even in those early, chaotic days there was some order to be had. People
followed [netiquette](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etiquette_in_technology),
they had to unless they wanted to be flamed to kingdom come. Even new users
quickly learned it was best not to piss off other users.

The early internet communities were not to be taken seriously, lest you wanted
to get hurt. This, in my opinion was a central tenet of the ethical framework
and philosophy that the early internet citizens adhered to. It was something
crucial that you had to understand in order to navigate this vast new space of
consciousness.

All of this child-like feeling of wonder and sense of being able to do
everything and nothing without no repercussions whatsoever was made possible by
one thing and one thing only. Anonymity. For the first time in human history we
could talk and discuss with our fellow humans in total anonymity. It did not
matter who you were, what mattered was what you had to say.

Of course, we used this new opportunity to post pictures of cats and bully our
fellow human beings. But that was (and still is) irrelevant if you knew how to
navigate and a small price to pay to finally be able to have a world-wide
/agora/ where everyone could come and discuss their ideas and truly speak their
minds without shame or fear of repercussion because of the invisible and
all-powerful mantle of anonymity.

The most important advice you could give a new internet user was: "Do not use
your real name as a username". It was unthinkable to use your real name to
identify yourself in an online community. Anonymity was strictly enforced if not
encouraged.

This is why I find it extremely odd how everyone is now happy to use their real
names, birthdays, and birthplaces when signing up on Facebook. *The central
tenet of netiquette is gone*. Just like that. 

It feels like overnight the internet was flooded by everyone. It's obvious that
your grandma will not know or even care about netiquette. But with the massive
use of social networks the internet has become just a mirror of real life. You
sign in on Facebook, you check what your friends are up to, they check what you
are up to. Of course, this sort of inter-connectivity would not have been
possible without internet or with a strictly enforced anonymity. But is it worth
it?

The world wide web is one of the most important inventions of mankind. It's the
tool that makes it possible to have all the human knowledge under one's
fingertips. It's what makes it possible for that 16-year old boy on the other
side of the world to speak their mind with impunity. It's what makes it possible
for that 50-something year old woman living next to you to publish her thoughts
without repercussion or shame.

I'm not saying that anonymity is the be-all end-all tool for human
freedom. Acknowledgment is also important. But it's also important to know that
we have this tool available to us. We should use it. 
