---
layout: post
title: "Arrival"
date: 2017-09-01 23:11:00
categories: Movies
---

[I just watched Arrival (2016)](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2543164/?ref_=nv_sr_1)

Absolutely wonderful movie. Able to transmit something few movies are capable of
nowadays. I found it to be an extremely smart movie, especially when comparing
it to the science fictions that are being released nowadays. The idea behind it
is a very original one.

The twist was unexpected and left me with a sense of wonder and awe. The central
idea of the movie -- how to ocommunicate with an intelligent race of
extraterrestial beings in case of a contact is one I have thought of before. I
would have assumed that they would use some sort of mathematical system to do
that but I guess that would defeat the purpose of the movie, or rather, the
aliens.

The central philosophy of this movie though, and the thing that intrigued me the
most was the idea that the universe is deterministic: things are bound to happen
one way and they will happen that way.

The heptapods knew that, Adams' character knew that as well, considering how she
did not do anything to avoid the birth of her daughter but rather accepted it
with both the joy and the pain it would bring. I guess a deterministic universe
is the safest thing there is. There's nothing we can do to change what the
universe has decided to happen, in a way, what is destined to happen. There's no
free will, no true consequences to our actions, there's only steps each one of
us must take to ensure that the pre-determened plan of the universe comes to
fruition and that every piece is where it should be at all times. It's quite
soothing, but also quite disappointing. Not being in charge of your destiny is a
terrible thing I believe.
