---
layout: post
title: "pass - the best password manager"
date: 2017-12-05
categories:
  - Linux
  - FOSS
  - Productivity
---

In my never-ending quest in improving the various day-to-day tools that I use,
there's one particular tool that I have never found the need to replace.
Strangely enough, it's also the tool I probably use the most. I'm talking about
[password-store](https://github.com/rupa/password-store)

Password-store (or _pass_) is one of the best (if not _the_ best) password
managers out there. If you have never heard of it, here's a quick intro for you.

_pass_ is a simple but powerful password manager that fully adheres to the UNIX
philosophy of doing one thing and doing it well. It's mainly a CLI tool but it
also has several UI clients available as well.

Pass works by saving individual user passwords as GPG-encrypted files inside
folders named as the site they belong to. So for example, if you have an account
named `foo` for a site `bar` the folder structure would be:

    ~/.password-store/
        bar/
            foo.gpg
            
What's great is that this folder can then be version controlled (usually with
git) and there's even built-in integration with git. So you just add a remote
git repository when setting up pass for the first time and then every time you
want to back up your passwords you simply run `pass git push`. This way you have
full control over your passwords and you avoid relying on third-party services
for which you have no absolute safety on how your passwords are stored or
whether they will keep staying in business.

_pass_ also generates new passwords for you with varying degrees of strength and
length. So for example if you want to generate a 64 character long password for
the aforementioned _bar_ website you simply run `pass generate bar/foo 64`. To
copy that password to your clipboard you run `pass -c bar/foo`. That's it. Those
are probably the only commands you need to use with _pass_

There is also a free and open source _pass_ [client for
Android](https://f-droid.org/packages/com.zeapo.pwdstore/) that can be used
along
[OpenKeychain](https://f-droid.org/packages/org.sufficientlysecure.keychain/)
for sharing and managing your private PGP key(s).
