---
layout: post
title: "You should still learn C"
date: 2018-04-29 21:00:00
categories: Programming
---

In a landscape mostly rules by the various Javascripts, Pythons, and other
high-level languages, someone who is starting out with writing programs will
feel encouraged to skip learning that old fossil that is C. But C offers a lot
of advantages over even the most modern programming languages and should give a
healthy foundation and understanding to any programmer that makes the effort to
study it.

For starters, the most obvious and important advantage that C provides is that
it is able to give you an understanding and overview of computers and software
in a way that most modern languages nowadays fail to do. It forces you to
grapple with memory management, pointers, and even encoding in a way no other
widely used programming language does. It's able to do this because it does not
abstract away most inner workings of a program the way a garbage-collected
language like Java or Python would do.

A second important advantage is the portability that C offers. Most C compilers
(notable mention to GCC) will support almost all hardware in use today, from the
most powerful supercomputer to the smallest embedded chip. It's also supported
by almost all operating systems used nowadays.

The low abstraction and excellent hardware support have made C an industry
standard when it comes to low-level OS development. The Linux kernel for example
is written entirely in C. XNU (the macOS kernel) is written in both C and C++
The various BSDs are also written primarily in C. But this does not mean that
you should learn C only if you want to work in kernel development, quite the contrary. 

Even if you don't aim to ever write production-level software in C, learning it
will give you a competitive edge and even facilitate the apprehending of other
programming languages. For example, other than giving you a deep understanding
of how a compiler or interpreter may abstract certain things (pointers, memory
management), it will also make it easier to learn the syntax of other C-like
programming languages of which there are many and they make up 70-80% of the
most used languages in the industry. Of these we can mention Java, Javascript,
Python, C++, Scala, Rust, etc. 

But even if you want to work on an even lower level of programming than C is
capable of, say, Assembly. You would still find it easier to have C as a
starting point since C is a language that abstracts the most hard to understand
parts of Assembly while giving you a gentle introduction to most of the core
concepts that you will have to keep in mind when writing Assembly code. As we
mentioned before, it's also a good jumping point in case you want to move to a
higher level paradoxically for the same reasons. It will not abstract the
concepts that high-level languages like Python will and it will not make it seem
like a lot of the things your programming language of choice does is magic.
