---
layout: post
title: "The siege of Numantia"
date: 2018-06-05 12:14:00
categories: History
---

Numantia was a city, or rather, a settlement in northern Spain during the time 
of the Roman Republic. It's famous because of a rebellion that started there 
instigated by the native celto-iberians of the Iberian peninsula and the 
subsequent siege of the city. Unsurprisingly, the rebellion was unsuccessful 
and while it had some initial discrete success, the Roman Republic finally 
decided to send a consul; one Scipio Africanus of Punic war fame who only a 
mere decade earlier had put the to put an end to it. 
What followed was a lengthy siege which ultimately ended with the destruction 
of Numantia and the killing or enslavement of its inhabitants. 

The remains of Numantia have become a sort of holy place for spanish nationalists
that regard it as a symbol of the endurance and love for liberty of the Spanish 
people. Even Cervantes immortalized the event in a tragedy he wrote, called, 
fittingly, _The Siege of Numantia_.

What I find interesting about this story however, is the fact that most of those
Spanish nationalists that go in a sort of pilgrimage to Numantia belong to the 
Roman Catholic religion, with the leader of their religion living in Rome. They 
speak a Latin language, a direct successor of the language spoken by the people
the Numantians rebelled against and the language that Scipio used to order the 
destruction of Numantia itself. Cervantes too wrote his tragedy in Spanish and 
learned about the event by reading Roman historians and Roman writers. The 
Numantians did not leave any written records. Everything we know about them is 
left behind by Roman historians such as Herodotus or Roman writers who would write
tragedies about Numantia for a Roman audience who was particularly keen on stories
about heroic barbarians who fought against all odds for their freedom; much like 
how modern Spaniards think about Numantians today.

The siege and destruction of Numantia is a minuscule event into a much larger
portrait of European and Human history. The even itself is nothing extraordinary, 
it was a rebellion like many others and like many others it failed when confronted
with a real and powerful threat in the shape of Scipio. What's particularly interesting
in all this is what followed after this event and what still continues to take place.
If not for the people who caused the rebellion in the first place and who ultimately were
the ones who brought about the destruction of Numantia, we might as well never have known
that there was a city in that geographical area, let alone know the reasons for the
rebellion and what really happened there. This small event and the effect it had on modern
Spaniards today is a good example about the massive influence that the Roman Empire has
had on the people and history of Europe and continues to have to this day.
